---
title: "When.java: a _Promises/A+_ implementation"
---
## Promises and Flow of Control

Using [Promises/A+](https://promisesaplus.com/) is a way to allow the programmer to compose asynchronous programs in a fashion similar to how synchronous programs are composed. A synchronous function can _return values/throw exceptions_; A Promise can become _fulfilled with values/rejected with reasons_. These properties determines the flow of control.

When a synchronous function throws an exception, the line-by-line flow of control is interrupted and transferred to a block of code that has declared itself capable of handling such exceptions: `try/catch`. From that point on, the line-by-line execution of the program is resumed, until another exception occurs or the end of the program is reached.

In the asynchronous world, Promises help to emulate this compositional style. A Promise that implements the [Promises/A+](https://promisesaplus.com/) specification implements the method `then`, which lets the programmer declare callback functions to execute _immediately after_ the Promise has become `fulfilled` or `rejected`. Furthermore, a call to `then` generates a _new_ Promise, whose state is bound to the return value of the callback functions. It is thus possible to create chains of Promises, where asynchronous calls are executed in a deterministic order according to certain rules:

 - if a Promise is `fulfilled`, control flow propagates to the next `onFulfilled` function in the chain.

 - if a Promise is `rejected`, control flow propagates to the next `onRejected` function in the chain.

Thus, an `onRejected` callback function in a chain of Promises assumes responsibility for any un-handled rejection that might have occurred up to that point, just as a `catch` clause takes care of any exception that occurs within the corresponding `try` block.

Let's say we call `then` on a Promise X, thus creating a new Promise Y. Let's then say at a later time the state of Promise A transitions to an end state (`fulfilled` or `rejected`), which triggers a callback function execution. The state of Promise Y then

 - is bound to the return value, if the function call returns successfully

 - transitions to `rejected`, if the function call throws an exception

As pointed out [in this blog post](https://blog.domenic.me/youre-missing-the-point-of-promises/), it is an important detail of the [Promises/A+](https://promisesaplus.com/) specification that a call to `then` _generates a new Promise_. This is what enables Promises to work as an analogue to the try/catch control flow of synchronous programming. Quoting Domenic Denicola:

> In other words, `then` is not a mechanism for attaching callbacks to an aggregate collection. It’s a mechanism for applying a transformation to a promise, and yielding a _new_ promise from that transformation.

## When.java

[When.java](https://github.com/ef-labs/when.java) is an Java implementation of the [Promises/A+](https://promisesaplus.com/) specification, by [ef-labs](https://github.com/ef-labs/).

In [When.java](https://github.com/ef-labs/when.java), the notion of a Promise is represented by the `Promise<T>` interface, where type `T` is the type of the promised value. `Promise<T>` extends the `Thenable<T>` interface, which has a single method with a pretty scary looking signature:

```java
<U> Promise<U> then(
                      Function<T, ? extends Thenable<U>> onFulfilled,
                      Function<Throwable, ? extends Thenable<U>> onRejected
                   );
```

Note how the return type `Thenable<U>` of the callback functions define the type `Promise<U>` that is created by a call to `then`. The output from a call to `then` is thus itself a Promise, governed by the callback functions of the source Promise, as defined by the Promises/A+ spec.

`then` is actually all there is to it, but to allow more readable code, When.javas' `Promise<T>` also defines a number of convenience methods, most importantly:

Method | Equal to
--- | ---
`then(Function<...> onFulfilled)` | `then(Function<...> onFulfilled, null)`
`otherwise(Function<...> onRejected)` | `then(null, Function<...> onRejected)`

The typical callback chain thus looks something like this:

```java
          Promise<String> promise1 = ...;
          promise1.then(string -> {
            Promise<Integer> promise2 = ...;
            return promise2;
          }).then(integer -> {
            System.out.println("Result: " + integer);
            return null;
          }).otherwise(exception -> {
            exception.printStackTrace();
            return null;
          });
```

where the last `otherwise` clause will take care of any exception that occurs within the chain. If both Promises is eventually reaches an end state, the chain will evaluate to a fulfilled Promise with value `null`.

> *TIP*: In languages less strongly typed than Java, one might allow the callback functions to return either a Promise _or_ a value. In Java this is of course not possible, but as a convenience, returning `null` from a callback function is effectively the same as returning a `fulfilled` Promise with fulfillment value `null`.

#### Danger: silent exceptions

An uncaught exception that occurs on the main thread in a Java program usually leaves a loud and clear stack trace in stdout. To the contrary, a uncaught rejection that happens in a chain of [When.java](https://github.com/ef-labs/when.java) Promises is never logged by the framework, but just silently discarded.

```java
        Promise<String> promise = ...;
        promise.then(s -> {
            throw new NullPointerException("Oops!"); // this is not logged
        });
```

The programmer needs to be extra careful and make sure that no unexpected errors occur, or add a `otherwise` at the end of the chain that makes sure to log un-handled errors.

#### Danger: implicit return types

Note how the return type `Thenable<U>` of the callback functions define the type `Promise<U>` that is returned from a call to `then`; i.e. the return type is _defined_ by the arguments. This follows from the [Promises/A+](https://promisesaplus.com/) specification and Javas' type safety. The strong typing can lead to a false sense of security regarding types, but it is quite possible to trick the framework into a `ClassCastException`:

```java
        Promise<String> promise = deferred.getPromise();
        promise.then(string -> {
            return when.resolve(new Object());
        }).otherwise(exception -> {
            return when.resolve("");
        }).then(string -> { // ClassCastException occurs here
            return when.resolve("");
        }).otherwise(exception -> {
            exception.printStackTrace();
            return null;
        });
```

The above example may be contrived, and can easily be avoided. Still, it might be good to be aware of this, if you are building more complex chains of Promises. A `ClassCastException` is not really expected here since there are no explicit casts, and combined with the "silent exception" behavior described above, it could create some nasty bugs.

### Unit testing Promise chains with Mockito

Suppose that you are working with an interface, designed, let's say, for an asynchronous event bus, which defines a single method: you send in a `String` message, and immediately get back a `Promise<String>` that eventually should resolve to a `String` response, or become rejected with some exception.

```java
interface EventBus {
        Promise<String> send(String message);
}
```

Suppose that you build a complex chain of calls to this method, sending messages back and forth and reacting to the responses in various ways:

```java
    public Promise<String> doSomethingAsync(EventBus bus, When when) {
        Promise<String> result = bus.send("First message").then(response -> {
            // do something with the response
            return bus.send("Next message");
        }).then(response -> {
            if (response.equals("error")) {
                throw new RuntimeException("Catastrophe!");
            }
            return bus.send("Final message");
        }).then(response -> {
            return when.resolve("Success!");
        }).otherwise(exception -> {
            // handle the error
            return when.reject(exception);
        });
        return result;
    }
```

You might want to write a simple unit test, to see what happens if the first call to `send` returns a sane response, but the second response is corrupt in some way, or an error message. How would you do that?

Here's a suggestion. First, define a helper class that lets you enqueue Promises, and then resolve or reject them one by one, in the order that they were enqueued:

```java
    public class PromiseQueue {

        private final LinkedList<Deferred<?>> queue = new LinkedList<>();

        <T> Promise<T> enqueue(Deferred<T> deferred) {
            queue.addLast(deferred);
            return deferred.getPromise();
        }

        <T> void resolveNext(T response) {
            Deferred<T> deferred = (Deferred<T>) queue.removeFirst();
            deferred.resolve(response);
        }

        void rejectNext(Throwable throwable) {
            queue.removeFirst().reject(throwable);
        }
    }
```

Then, with the help of `PromiseQueue`, mock the `EventBus` class with Mockito:

```java
    EventBus buildMock(PromiseQueue queue) {
        When when = WhenFactory.createSync();
        EventBus eventBus = Mockito.mock(EventBus.class);
        Mockito.when(eventBus.send(Mockito.anyString()))
                .thenAnswer(invocation -> queue.enqueue(when.defer()));
        return eventBus;
    }
```

Now you may design simple self-contained unit tests, like this one:

```java
    @Test
    public void test() {
        PromiseQueue queue = new PromiseQueue();
        EventBus bus = buildMock(queue);
        Promise<String> result = doSomethingAsync(bus);
        queue.resolveNext("this went well");
        queue.resolveNext("error");
        Assert.assertEquals(HandlerState.REJECTED, result.inspect().getState());
        Assert.assertEquals("Catastrophe!", result.inspect().getReason().getMessage());
    }
```

Simma lugnt.

[Leave a comment](https://github.com/mxns/mxns.github.io/issues/1)
